[TT-17295] Inline PEM certificates (#2407)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/certificates.mdx

This provides stronger security because:

- The server knows that the client is who they claim to be.
- The client knows that the server is legitimate.
- Both parties are cryptographically verified.

## Certificate Management

> Wherever Tyk accepts a certificate, the value is a **certificate reference**: a certificate ID from the Tyk Certificate Store, a local file path, or inline PEM content. The three forms are:

Reviewer: Inline PEM only works in API-definition certificate fields, not "wherever Tyk accepts a certificate". The `tyk.conf` fields (`ssl_certificates`, `security.certificates.control_api`, `security.certificates.mdcb_api`) go through the base config parser and only take a certificate ID or a file path. That's the TT-17295 scope, and I confirmed with OEL

Can we tighten the definition? Say a certificate reference is always an ID or a file path, then note that API-definition fields also accept inline PEM (5.14.0) while `tyk.conf` fields don't.

Author: It's more subtle than that - inline PEM works except for the dedicated `_file` fields (including in tyk.conf). It is important that the inline PEM (which will only realistically be via KV reference) is seen as a first class alternative. I'll reword.

> Wherever Tyk accepts a certificate, the value is a **certificate reference**: a certificate ID from the Tyk Certificate Store, a local file path, or inline PEM content. The three forms are:

Author: ```suggestion
Wherever Tyk accepts a certificate, the value is a **certificate reference** which can take one of three forms:
```

- The recommended approach for most deployments is the [Tyk Certificate Store](#tyk-certificate-store), which centralizes certificate management and is available in both licensed and OSS installations.
- [Inline PEM content](#inline-pem-content) (from **Tyk Gateway 5.14.0**) is the preferred approach for Kubernetes deployments where certificates are managed externally.

> - A legacy [local file path](#local-file-path) approach is also supported for backwards compatibility.

Author: ```suggestion
- A legacy [local file path](#local-file-path) approach is also supported for backwards compatibility.

Any of these forms can be used in the certificate fields in the API definition; the inline PEM content form is not supported in the `cert_file, key_file, ca_file` fields in the [External Services mTSL Config](/configure/external-service#mutual-tls-mtls-configuration) in the Gateway config file (`tyk.conf`).
```

Select either a valid PEM-encoded file containing a certificate, or a file containing PEM-encoded certificate concatenated with the PEM-encoded private key, and select **Upload**. If successful, the certificate will be loaded into the Certificate Store and assigned a certificate ID that you can use to associate it with a TLS interaction via API definition or Gateway configuration.

### Inline PEM Content

> From **Tyk Gateway 5.14.0**, certificate fields in API definitions accept inline PEM-encoded content directly, in addition to a certificate ID or file path. The PEM content follows the same format as the Tyk Certificate Store: a certificate chain optionally followed by a PEM-encoded private key.

Reviewer: Could we add a quick example here? The prose covers inline PEM and the `file://` pattern well, but there's nothing to copy-paste. Even a few lines showing a certificate field with inline PEM, and the same field with a `file://` reference, would help a lot, since `file://` is the pattern we're steering people toward.

Author: Yes, see below

> The primary use case is supplying certificates from a secret management system without storing them in the Control Plane. Any supported [KV reference](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store) can supply the PEM content at load time, for example, a `file://` reference can read a certificate mounted from a Kubernetes secret volume without the Control Plane ever storing the private key. See [Using Local Files as a KV Store](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store#local-files) for configuration details.

Author: ```suggestion
The primary use case is supplying certificates from a secret management system without storing them in the Control Plane. Any supported [KV reference](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store) can supply the PEM content at load time, for example, a `file://` reference can read a certificate mounted from a Kubernetes secret volume without the Control Plane ever storing the private key. See [Using Local Files as a KV Store](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store#local-files) for configuration details.

For example:

```yaml
server:
  clientCertificates:
    enabled: true
    allowlist:
      # Inline PEM content — suitable for testing; avoid embedding private keys directly
      - |
          -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
          MIIDazCCAlOgAwIBAgIUJhdB...
          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
      # file:// KV reference — recommended for Kubernetes deployments
      - "file:///etc/tyk/certs/client-ca.pem"
```

```

The primary use case is supplying certificates from a secret management system without storing them in the Control Plane. Any supported [KV reference](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store) can supply the PEM content at load time, for example, a `file://` reference can read a certificate mounted from a Kubernetes secret volume without the Control Plane ever storing the private key. See [Using Local Files as a KV Store](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store#local-files) for configuration details.

For example:

```yaml
server:
  clientCertificates:
    enabled: true
    allowlist:
      # Inline PEM content — suitable for testing; avoid embedding private keys directly
      - |
          -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
          MIIDazCCAlOgAwIBAgIUJhdB...
          -----END CERTIFICATE-----
      # file:// KV reference — recommended for Kubernetes deployments
      - "file:///etc/tyk/certs/client-ca.pem"

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
